Hi I'm Raghu Ram. Welcome to DadFit. This is a video series containing four videos. all explaining the concepts related to fitness like diet, workouts, lifestyle, habits and everything. I have linked all the reference materials for your future learning. So let's get started. Have you ever wondered, like, why some people who have lost weight suddenly regained all those? The secret is about any magical diet or secret workout. It's all about knowing the fundamentals of fitness and sticking to it over a long period of time. Really, there is no secret about fitness. It is just a basic knowledge. Spending time to learn those is one time investment and lifelong returns. Who this series is really for? It's biased towards dads who have a desk job and they are sitting in front of a computer. The videos in the series fits them mostly, but the fitness concepts are applicable to anyone. How to consume this video series is that you watch all the videos once. know what are the concepts are there When you try to implement those come back to the video and learn it again. Make a sense of those and try to fit it in your life. Here is my brief story. I am Raghu Ram. As of 2025, my age is 32. I am a software engineer by profession. I was fat in my 20s and I have hit a peak weight of 96 kg by early 2019. Now I am maintaining at 63 kg range. The turning point in my life was a hiking activity in Thailand. I was in Erawan waterfalls I was out of breath and I couldn't walk at all. I saw older people breezing just past me. I realized that I need to be fit for life. It's not about weight loss. I need to be fit for decades. So I joined gym later in that year, learned the basics of fitness. After that, I got married. I was blessed with a kid and now I have fitness as part of my healthy life. Where do I stand today? I have a good amount of muscle mass and muscle strength. I am not fat. I am in the 12 to 15 percentage body fat range, meaning that a person with 65 kg, 12% body fat means 7.8/7.9 kg of fat in the body. I have low visceral fat. It's not the fat you see around the belly It is the fat that wraps around the internal organs. They are dangerous and can lead to chronic diseases like heart diseases, stroke, diabetes, etc.. Keeping it low is important for a long term health. Let us dig deep into male body fat percentage. Look at the bottom row. It shows people with more than 25% body fat. It is basically hard to be in that range. One reason being they will be experiencing physical pains like knee pain, lower back pain, shoulder pain. They will also have emotional pain of being fat. Now consider the people with the less than 10% body fat range. Being in this range is also hard Reason being, you have to be more careful of your diet and exercise so that you keep looking like that forever. It's hard 12 to 15% body fat is a sweet spot. You can be in that spot by just following a balanced diet and doing regular exercise. That is what we are aiming for. Let's see my own progress from 2020 to 2025. By Feb 2020, I already lost 18-20 kg of my weight, but I haven't built much of muscle and I didn't have much strength either. I was still having belly fat. You can see by 2022 and 2024 that I have built some muscle, but fat was coming down. I was building up my strength as well. Getting shredded wasn't my priority. My priority was to accommodate the fitness in my life so that it becomes a habit. As I stick to the practices which suit me, I am now able to be in the 12 to 15% body fat range, for the entire year of 2025. So how did I learn fitness? I joined the gym by late 2019. I got a good trainer. He taught me the basics of diet, workout and everything. Then Covid came. I didn't want to stop my progress. YouTube became my knowledge source. I tried so many things. I analyzed everything and then I have found which one fits me, in terms of diet and exercise. By late 2020, I got married. Before that, I was going to gym for like 5 to 6 days a week. After marriage, it was not possible for me because of family priorities and work responsibilities. Then I had to rethink the way I was going to the gym. So I dug deep into muscle building concepts I shifted my workout to just 3 to 4 days a week. I got better results, actually. Then I adjusted my diet, to fit my family life. By late 2022, I was blessed with a kid. I spent more time with him. In each phase of his growth, His sleep cycle was different, so I had to adjust my workout as per that. There were days where I have gone to gym by 5:30 in the morning. There were days where I have gone to gym by night or by evening. People were asking for advices. I gave the knowledge which I have. Later by the end of 2024, I finished my personal training and nutrition certificate courses from NASM So that makes me a certified personal trainer. So what this series really is, It’s nothing new. It is just an ordered collection of all the fitness knowledge, available on the internet now. Just that it is presented clearly in a sequential manner. how do you define fitness? So there is no strict definition for one. It varies as per sports. If you check cricket, you have to have explosive power for batting. You need to run when needed. You need to be performing even when you are tired. If you can do all those, you are fit in cricket. When you check marathon sport, you should be able to run a longer distance without getting tired. If you can do that, you are good in running. Let’s come to strongman. They are huge, with more muscles and more fat. They have extreme power to lift and throw massive weights. They can’t run fast. So fitness depends on each sport actually In DadFit What is the target? The first target is functional strength. You should be able to lift heavy weights without getting injured. Good example, being you should be able to lift a sofa, You should be able to lift a water can (around 20kg) Second one being endurance. You should be able to walk a long distance by carrying kid, by carrying your luggages. You should be able to sprint just when it is needed. You should be able to do everything without experiencing any body pains like lower back pain, shoulder pain, knee pain and everything. You should be having less visceral fat You should be able to achieve everything without affecting your work and family. There are some important metrics which will indicate our longevity. The first one being VO2 max. It says about how much oxygen our body can make use for a high intensity activity like sprinting. The next one is muscle mass and muscle strength. It’s the volume of muscle you have and how much strength it has, how much heavy you can lift without getting injured. The next one being the bone density. It's about how strong your bone is With better muscle and stronger bone, you can be injury free. Next one is blood glucose. It is the glucose level in the blood, taken when you are fasting. It should be low, indicating your better metabolic health. Here is a self learn lesson for you. Check out why metabolic health is important. Then there are two kinds of lipoproteins LDL and HDL. They carry cholesterol and fats through the bloodstream. LDL is bad. It can deposit the cholesterol in your artery walls, causing chronic diseases like heart diseases, diabetes, etc.. HDL is good. You should aim for a lesser LDL level of less than 100mg per deciliter. HDL above 50mg per deciliter. Why everything matters? We aim to decrease the probability of having chronic diseases, in the longer run actually. Sure, we can't avoid it 100%. Maybe we can put good efforts in the right direction. With better workout and balanced diet, You will be in a good mood. You'll be able to think clearly. Last one being we are not doing it to get appreciation from others. We are not doing it, just to look good. We are doing it for our health, for the importance to the family. Before starting your workout or diet, consult with your doctor who knows your entire medical history. They can give better advices, on what some special pitfalls you should avoid In DadFit, We believe in two core philosophies. First one, being slow and steady wins the race. As you have seen my progress over the years, I was not in any urgency to reduce my body fat and build muscles faster. Rather, I was so conscious of doing it slow so that I can fit the fitness in a sustainable way to my life. I should be able to build a strong foundation. Now fitness is my habit. It is not a boring chore to me. Second philosophy being which hard do you choose? You know that being fat is hard. Why? It's so obvious that you will be having physical pain and emotional toll of being fat. Being fit is also hard. You should be self disciplined. You should be learning always. You would be thinking how to address a situation which will affect your fitness lifestyle. Both are hard. But the second type of hardness is good. They will reward you in the longer run. In fitness there are three fundamental building blocks. The main one being diet. You will spend around 6 to 7% of your weekly time. It has impact of around more than 70%. The next one being exercise, you will be spending just around 3% of your weekly time. It has around 30% impact. The next one being lifestyle. It’s your habit outside the diet and workout. You will live your daily life. How you spend that time matters really. Let’s see each one of those in brief. The main purpose of diet is to give you energy. When you work out, your body undergoes some kind of micro damages. The food you have should be able to heal you, should be able to prepare you for future occurrences. The diet should be a balanced one with proper protein, carbs, and fat, along with micronutrients like vitamins and minerals. Do not do extreme diets like water diet or fruit diet without knowing the purpose of what they're exactly doing to your body. Consult with your doctor before taking such decisions. Exercise. So for weight loss, you would have seen people going to the gym, hopping onto the treadmill and they will just run just for weight loss. It's not that cardio is bad. It has its own place in the fitness. People will ignore resistance training. They wouldn’t know its benefits. Both goes hand in hand. So both should be incorporated in your workout schedule Lifestyle It is the majority of your waking hours. You should be more active. You should be walking everywhere you can. You should be playing with your kid. You can take them to park. You can take them to local grocery store, Please be aware of your family gatherings or birthday parties because those parties are filled with more calorie foods like sweets, chocolates, more carb foods. In those occasions, you should be able to take better decision of how you are going to navigate those. Don't think of diet and exercise as a chore. Make them your habits. Make them as you a part of your life. Habits are hard to break. Consider everything taught in this series as fundamental block of fitness. As you learn each topic, use those blocks to build a better foundation. When you have a doubt, do your research until you are so convinced of that, then fit it in your lifestyle. If you like the video, please share it with your friends and family who might find it useful. You can support my work by buying me a cup of coffee with the link in the description. For personal training. Check out that dadfit.in I can't wait for you to get started on your fitness journey. Let’s see you on the next video. Bye!

Hi. Welcome to second video in this series. In this video we will understand the diet, how much food to eat? What kind of food has which effect in the body? There are some self learn sections. I encourage you to learn those. So let's get started. First things first. Our body basically works like a machine. We need the right fuel in right quantities to keep it running smoothly. In terms of weight management, we can't ignore the first law of thermodynamics. That is, energy can neither be created or be destroyed. As per that, excess weight in the body has to be converted to another form, which essentially is sweat and carbon dioxide. That's the only way to lose weight. No other shortcut. Each food has its own energy. We measure those in terms of calories. Same way when we do some activity, we spend our energy that is also measured in calories. When the total food intake calorie is less than the calories spent by our body, it results in weight loss. It's called caloric deficit or negative energy balance. The food has two types of nutrients: macro and micro. Each playing its own role in the body. Let's see one by one. Macros include the nutrients in the food like proteins, carbs, and fat. We measure those in grams. Like how much protein is there in egg? How much fat is there in avacado? How much carb is there in white rice or brown rice? Each macro has a role in our body. Let's start with protein. One gram of protein has four calories. When you say one gram of protein, it doesn't mean one gram of chicken or one gram of egg. Example 100g of chicken breast has 21g of protein. One full egg has six grams of protein. So based on each food, the protein quantity varies. Same way for other macros as well. Protein is the important food for muscle building. We will see how muscle building works in the next video. But it's an important macro. Eating macro will keep you full. Compare the time when you have eaten a bowl full of rice and some chicken. Which one made you feel full? It's obviously going to be chicken. That is because chicken has or generally protein has high thermogenic effect. It means that your body has to spend more energy to digest that protein. What makes proteins special in muscle building? It's the amino acid in it. It is the building block of protein. There are 20 amino acids, out of which 11 are non-essential. Nine are essential. Essential means that your body can't produce those. You need to take them via diet. Among those 9 essential amino acids, leucine plays a major role in repairing and building muscle. Let’s see about difference of protein in veg and non-veg sources. Let's start with amino acid profile. A protein source is said to be complete only if it has all the 9 amino acids. Non-veg sources They will have all the amino acids, but the veg sources, they won't have all the 9 For example, when you take dal, it will miss Methionine. So you have to compensate that with roti. You have to take roti and dal together to get all the nine amino acids. So when you're taking veg based protein sources, you should be careful to make sure that you take all the nine essential amino acids. Second one is bioavailability. It is your body's ability to absorb that protein. Let us say that I am eating 100g of chicken breast. My body will be able to absorb all the 21g of protein. Meanwhile, if I eat 100g of rajma, though it has 22g of protein. My body won't be able to absorb all those 22g. Instead, it will be able to absorb only 15 to 16g of protein. So now fibers, non-veg sources, generally they won't have fibers. They will have fat because in meat you will have both protein and fat. Generally veg sources will have both carbs and fiber, making it better for digestion. When you take non-meat protein source, you need to include fiber separately to make the digestion better. Now let us see the veg protein sources. These are all the list of veg protein sources. It shows how much of protein you will get when you cook 100g of the raw weight of the food. It is been sorted in the descending order. After the whey protein, soya chunks give a massive 52g of protein per 100 gram. You can't eat all those 100g in a single sitting, but you can include those in your meal to give a good amount of protein. Most of the protein sources contain carb content as well. So when you're counting calories, it will also lead to some contribution. Now let’s see some non-veg protein sources. This list gives you the amount of protein you will get per 100g of raw weight of the food. Just like before, it's been sorted in the descending order. 100g of chicken breast will give you 21g of protein. It has little to no fat. 100 gram of goat meat will give you 20g of protein. It has more fat, Fish is one of the best source of protein. Each fish has a different quantity of protein in it. Egg is also a great protein source. You can include it, as part of your daily diet. You can have whole egg as well because egg yolk has a good amount of vitamins and minerals as well. Okay, now we know there are protein sources, but how much protein we need to take per day? W.H.O. recommends 0.8g of protein per kg of bodyweight for a sedentary adult. Bodybuilders take 2.2g of protein per kg of body weight, But it is enough to take only 1.5 to 1.75 gm of protein per kg of body weight for optimal results. For a person with 65 kg, it is enough to take around 100 to 115 gm of protein per day. Now let’s see fat. One of the macro, people are most afraid of. There is no need to afraid of it. It is a must one for optimal brain and hormone functions. You need facts to absorb vitamins like A, D, E and K. One gram of fat has nine calories, so it should be included the diet with calculated amount. Types of fat. Not all fats are equal. Each one has different effects on the body. Saturated fats: So these are the fats found in meat. Butter. They had a reputation of being bad for health. But when you consume those in calculated quantities, they don't cause problems. they are good. Unsaturated fats: So these are the fat you found in nuts, seeds, avocado those kind of thing. It’s a good fat. You can include those The fat which you need to avoid entirely is trans fats. So these are the facts you will find in processed food fried items. It will increase your LDL and decrease your HDL. we do not want that to happen. We have many fat sources. Mainly we take fats from nuts like almonds, cashews, walnuts. We can also take them from seeds like flax seeds, chia seeds. hemp seeds, sunflower seeds. These seeds have fiber content as well. Remember to eat nuts and seeds in moderation, because I have seen diets where it was proposed to have a handful of nuts. That is a difference in calories from 10 cashews to 30 cashews, that can fit in my hand. So eat those after measuring properly. We will see how to measure food in the future slides. One of the best fat source is Ghee. It is ideal for cooking and frying at high temperature. It is the best fat source you can include daily in your diet. Yeah, I like to eat it with dal, I like to fry it with chicken. those kind of things. So you can try those. Where else we can find the fats so we can find fats in full fat dairy products like cheese, full fat milk. When cooking food with oil, don't go for refined oils. Go for locally sourced, cold pressed oil. I go for cold pressed sesame oil or cold pressed coconut oil. I don't go for foods which are fried in refined oils, or which are deep fried. Generally, olive oil is good for health, but I'm not sure of its authenticity in India, given that I can find so many olive oil bottles in all the supermarkets. So I'm afraid of those. So what are the healthy ways of cooking foods with oil? You can do air frying. Air frying is a goto for me, when I cook fish or chicken. I just apply a tablespoon of oil over the chicken or fish. Go for the airfrying. We can go for grilling. We can go for steaming or if you want to add some masala or some kind of vegetables, you can go for a saute. You can pour measured oil like you can add 1 or 2 tablespoons of oil. Go for saute these cooking methods will conserve the food's nutrients. So don't go for deep frying. Now let us see carbs. It's the go to source of energy for our body. It is available in sources like rices, roti, oats, quinoa, those kind of food. Once you eat carbs, your body converts the carbs to glucose for energy unused glucose are stored in muscle and liver as glycogen so that we can reuse it later. The glycogen, which are available in this quantity, they are stored as fat in our body, so that our body can make use of fat as energy source, In case our body is deprived of energy. One gram of carb has four calories of energy, so one gram of protein has four calories, one gram of fat has nine calories, one gram of carbs has four calories. There are different types of carbs, simple carbs, and complex carbs. Simple cups mean they quickly break down for energy. It will cause quick rise and fall of sugar in the blood. Complex carbs, on the other hand, they are digested slowly. They provide sustained glucose into the bloodstream. So you won't get energy quickly, but you will get energy at a sustained pace. Simple carbs include foods like sweets, sugars, white rice. When the complex include brown rice, oats, quinoa, millet, barley, sweet potato. You can feel the difference of eating a simple carb versus eating a complex carb. You think of how you felt when you eat a sweet versus, a time when you have eaten oats or brown rice. When we discuss carbs, we have to discuss the fibers also. Carbs have fibers in them. There are two types of fibers: soluble and insoluble. Soluble. As the name suggests, it dissolve in water and forms like a gel. It helps lowering blood cholesterol and the glucose level. So it's better for sugar control. You can find these fibers in oats nuts, seeds. We have another type - insoluble fiber. They do not dissolve in water. Instead it promotes good ball movement. It will help prevent constipation. You can find those in vegetables, fruit skins, When we discuss carbs and fiber, we have to discuss gut. So the gut is the gastrointestinal tract. track from the mouth to the rectum, everything. It contains trillions of bacteria. they are called gut microbiome. They play a critical role in maintaining our health and immunity. It also affects our mood. We often heard we have to trust our gut feeling. So it's the same gut. We have to keep it healthy. how do we keep it healthy? We have to include two kind of foods prebiotics and probiotics. Prebiotics are the food which we are going to feed the preexisting bacteria in our gut. So those foods include onions, garlic, banana, oat, those kind of foods. Second kind of food is probiotics. So these are all the live microorganisms which we are going to eat. We can find those in fermented foods basically. You can find those in curd, yogurt, other things like kefir kimchi, sauerkraut This is a self learn section for you. You learn about glycemic index versus glycemic load. And you learn about Fodmap vegetables. You learn about starch and non-starchy vegetables. Now that we have finished all the macros. Let’s go for micros. We measure those in milligrams and micrograms. there are vitamins and minerals help our body to perform optimally at the cellular level. So we shouldn't ignore those. Though you hit your macro goals, you should hit your macro goals also. In vitamins we have two categories: fat soluble and water soluble. Fat solubles are the ones that need fat to get absorbed in the body. So vitamins like A, D, E and K they belong to this category. Water soluble vitamins are the ones that need water to get absorbed by the body. So they are basically vitamin B complex and C. so you need both water and fat in your food, for better nutrient absorption. Minerals are also of two types based on how much our body need them. They are major and trace minerals. In our modern diet, we often have deficiency of vitamin D, B12. From minerals, we basically miss iron, zinc, magnesium. Each kind of fruits and vegetables have different proportions of those vitamins and minerals. So what kind of food you need to eat so that you will obtain everything? Basically you have to eat whole eggs, organ meats like mutton spleen or mutton liver. Go for fatty fish, nuts, seeds, dairy products and make sure that you eat lots of fruits and vegetables. So this is one of, my favorite. I have friends asking me, what are all the fat loss foods or what are the weight gain foods? So basically, it's like they're asking me what foods to eat to lose weight or what foods to eat to gain weight. There is no such food as weight loss food or weight gain food. Weight loss occurs only in caloric deficit like we have seen before. We have to spend more energy than the food we eat to lose weight. Same way if you want to gain weight, you have to eat more food than your body spends. The only difference is good food versus bad. So you need to be eating good food always. For example, you can take a difference between, Air fried home cut potato fries. So basically you buy potatoes, you cut, you clean, then, you boil it to remove the starch. Then you air fry it, and then add some salt pepper to it. You compare it with, deep fried French fries. So both are potato fries. Which one is a better option? It’s obviously the air fried one. So the quality of food has impact on the body. we need to make sure that we are having good food. Now let's see supplements. It's an interesting area. People have many doubts whether it's safe to take or not. As per my experience and research, It's safe to take all the well researched supplements. So those supplements should not replace your main diet. Instead, wherever there's a gap in your diet, you can take a supplement. So let's say that, for your protein, you can't take the daily target. So at that time, you can go for a protein supplement like whey protein or a protein bars. So we will see one by one. Let's start with whey. It's one of the most researched supplement. It is extracted from liquid whey which is a byproduct of yogurt or curd creation. The liquid which is dehydrated to a powdered form and sold as whey supplement. Each scoop of whey will give at least 24 to 30g of protein. Your body can absorb this protein faster. This is the only protein source which doesn't have a much thermic effect because your body absorbs it fastly. If you have a lactose intolerance, go for whey isolate because it has little to no carbs or fats. Otherwise you can go for weight concentrate. Whey concentrate costs less compared to whey isolate. Now let’s see creatine. Creatine monohydrate is the well researched supplement. It's good for muscle building. It's good for brain function. So what basically does is that it adds water to your muscle, it letting you to push more in the gym. You should be able to push more weight. You'll be able to grow muscle. You can take 3 to 5g per day, but make sure that you are taking creatine at the same time of each day for better absorption, basically. Next multi-vitamin though we take fruits and vegetables, there is a chance that we miss some of the vitamins or minerals in a day. At that time, you can take multi-vitamin as a insurance. So when can you take multivitamins that you take it along with the meal, which has a fat source, because you need fats to absorb vitamins A, D, E, and K. Fish Oil are basically good for your brain and heart health. It's a good fat. You will get it in 300mg capsules in the pharmacies. Start with three milligrams and then you can build up to one gram per day. So there are many other supplements. We have vitamin D3 to address the lack of sunlight exposure. We have magnesium glycinate. It helps in, better muscle recovery, stress management and to help with the better sleep. Collagen is one of the best supplements for skin health and connective tissue health. So the last one is pre-workout. It's a caffeine based. You take it to enhance your energy. You enhance your focus and performance in the gym. You will feel so focused that, you are so zoned in to do the workouts. You take it before 30 to 45 minutes of workout. But make sure that you don't take it daily. Don't take it weekly. Make sure that you take it in moderation. Apart from this, there are so many supplements in the market like l-carnitine l tartrate. Ashwagandha. So many things. I recommend you to take those, after discussing with the good endocrinologist. So those who are specialized in glands and hormones, with the proper blood test. Okay, so now we know what are calories, what are all the macros? What are all the micros? And we know that we are we can lose weight only in caloric deficit. But how many calories to eat exactly in a day? For that, we need to calculate TDEE. It is total daily energy expenditure. It's unit is obviously calories. It is the amount of energy you spend in a day. It has a four parts. First one is basal metabolic rate. It's the calories spent by your body to just keep you alive. It's the major part. So if you have more muscles, your body will spend more calories to keep you alive. The next one is exercise activity thermogenesis. It is the calories your body spends when you're doing active exercises. It's like it's the calories your body spends during your gym sessions. The next one is non exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT). It is the calories spent by your body when you are doing some non-planned activities. So those activities include playing with your kid or the small walk you take to grocery So basically you have to be more physically active in a day so that you can, spend some more calories. The next one is thermic effect of foods. If the calories spent by your body to digest the food. So if you include include more protein, your body spends more energy to digest that protein itself. So these are the four parts. Okay. So what is the number you need exactly? Let’s say that, You want to maintain your weight. You don't want to lose weight or you don't want to gain weight. How much calories you can take per day? It's your weight in kilograms x 2.2 x 14. So for a person with the 65 body weight, the maintenance calories is 2000. Okay, now I know that I have to take 2000 calories, but what's the macro breakdown? How much protein I should take? How much carbon should take? How much fat I should take? I know that protein has four calories. Carb has four calories. Fat has nine calories. Let's start with the protein goal of 1.75g of protein per kg of body weight. So for 65 kg, we will need 114g of protein. So that covers 456 calories. Let us say that we have a goal to take at least 30 percentage of calories from fat. Meaning, I have to take 600 calories from fat. With 67g of fat, we can cover those 600 calories. So now we have covered protein and fat, totaling upto 1056 calories. Remaining 945 calories, we can take it from 236g of carbs. So we started with protein. We continued with the fat. We took the remaining calories from carbs. Let’s see the sample date for this micro split. I have covered this macros in three different meals. You can choose to split it as you see fit. You can now choose your preferred carb sources, fat sources, protein sources to cover those 2000 calories. Okay, so now we have seen the calorie split and the sample diet also. Let’s see some more eating guidelines. Always always give priority to protein. Try to have 1.5 to 1.75 gram of protein per kg of body weight per day. Have good healthy fats. Have good amount of fiber. Then go for complex carbs Don't have, in between meal snacks because your body is already digesting your meal. So don't disturb that. Always drink plenty of water. Start your day with warm water. At least drink some 400 to 500ml of warm water. Start your day with that. Okay. So now We have seen how much calories we need in a day to maintain our weight. Out of those calories, we know how to do a good macro split. But how to lose weight. Okay. Let's assume that a person with 90 kg they want to lose weight. So what is their maintenance calories? It's 90 times 2.2 times 14. It's 2772 calories. We should always aim for 1 to 2% of body weight loss per month. Not more than that. We are doing this because we want to achieve the weight loss in a sustained way. For 90 kg body weight with 2% weight loss, we have to lose around 1.8 kg in 30 days. Please know that to lose one kg, we have to be in a deficit of 7700 calories. So to lose 1.8 kg of weight, it is 13,860 caloric deficit for 30 days. So when you divide 13,860 with 30, each day you have to be in a deficit of 462 calories. So eating 2310 calories will give the desired result. Do not aim for a faster weight loss, aim for a sustained one. Here there is a self learn lesson for you. Why 7,700 caloric deficit leads to one kg of weight loss. You see the reason behind that? So these are all the YouTube channels. I personally like from the diet aspect. It is not a sponsored one. If you find a good one you can, choose to follow those. Make sure that it is making sense. Okay, so now we know how much calorie we should eat to lose weight. But how do we track the food we. So for that, first invest in a digital food weighing scale and measuring spoons. Using this you can log your food in apps like HealthifyMe or MyFitnessPal. While logging, make sure that you are tracking it in grams or tablespoons for better accuracy. Don't track with the cup of rice or do not track with 100 ML of fat. Those kind of things. Don't do those Always make it a habit to track your food regularly. So this will give you idea of how much exact food you are eating. So that even when you are not able to track the food, you will have a eyeball guess of how much calories you are consuming. Okay, so we know how to buy good fruits and vegetables, we can look at those. But how do you buy better products from grocery store? Like how do you buy a good packet of noodles. We have so many brands. Which is a better one when buying grocery items. These kind of items don't look at the front side. Front side is entirely marketing. See the back side of the pack that tells the truth. First you have to observe the macros. See how much protein is there? See how much fat, added sugars, trans fat, fibers, sodium is there in the product? These images compare between, instant noodles and millet noodles. See the difference in higher protein and, less sodium in the millet one. Which one you will prefer? So I guess it's obviously the millet one. So after seeing that macro split, check the ingredients. Ingredients are often listed as per the decreasing order of their weight check the instant noodles. It has maida, palm oil and some chemicals which we don't even know. Now see the millet one It is mostly whole wheat and some millet. Always buy the products with the known ingredients and make sure that they do not have maltodextrin, high fructose corn syrup, or they do not have palm oil or they don't have excess chemicals. So it will filter out most of the unwanted foods in the grocery shopping. So we believe this way of checking. So why do we believe this way? Like that’s because we have trust in FSSAI. There are chances some companies could cheat FSSAI At that time, what we can do is you buy the food, you cook it, you consume the food for a week. You see how you feel, you see your change in energy You observe how your mood changes. Then you decide whether you can, have that food in your pantry or not. Meal timing. When having food, always eat in 8 to 10 hours of window, with the remaining hours to be fasting. So fasting more hours will help our body heal better. You can also aim for 24 hours fasting per week. When your body goes for fasting, it basically heals your body. Don't eat 2 to 3 hours before sleeping because you want your body to concentrate on sleep rather than your digestion. Okay. So alcohols and cigarets, you probably would have known the answer know. It's obviously a no because it affects everything. It affects your muscle building process. It affects your internal organs in an irreversible way. You have only one body to live. So if we can't reverse some effect, why do that? It keeps you dehydrated. It affects your sleep. So don't have those okay. we have discussed many concepts. We have discussed so many. Don't worry about how to follow everything at once at least. Instead use this list. You follow it top to bottom, make one thing as a habit and move on to the next. Take your time to adapt that in your life. Start with having good amount of water and throwing junk food out. So I think you can finish it off in a week or so. Then avoid alcohol and cigarettes, then go with the remaining. You make sure that you are completing one step cleanly so that you can have a compounding result. Okay, when can you have a cheap meal low? So let's say that you're going out. You have a burger in front of you. It's afternoon. Maybe you can decide to have it or skip it so that you can have a evening meal or dinner. How do you decide? It is so simple. It's just two variables to consider. First, joy of eating. How much? How much joy that food brings to you during eating and after that, second guilt of eating. How much are you going to regret yourself for eating that food? You might wonder Like, okay, so what kind of activities I should do today or tomorrow to burn the calories? If the joy of eating exceeds the guilt, go for it. But don't have the cheat meals too often. If the if the joy doesn't exceed the guilt, you're good. Just don’t have the cheat meal. That’s all. No confusion. Don’t create a box of like you are supposed to do only this. Have some freedom. Think and take some good decisions. So if you like the video, please share it with your friends and family members who might find it useful. You can support my work by grabbing me a cup of coffee, using the link in the description. For personal training, you can check out dadfit.in Thanks for your time. See you in the next video. Bye!

Hi! Welcome to the third video in the series. In this video we will discuss about exercises. We will discuss about resistance training and cardio. Both of them are important. We will see how to incorporate both in the training. There are some self learn sections in this video as well. I encourage you to learn those. So let's get started. People go to the gym. They go to the treadmill, and start running for weight loss and avoid weightlifting. Both have their own benefits. If you take resistance training, we can build muscle mass. We can improve our bone strength and muscle strength. Our body's metabolism will also improve. But when you compare cardio, it will help us improve our heart and lungs health. Both has its place in the fitness routine. So let's start with resistance training. There are seven fundamental movements which we use in our daily activities, Push - we will push the door open. We’ll do pushups. Pull - We will pull the shutter down and upward pull movement. Those kind of things. Squat - We will sit down and get up. Hinge - We will bend down to take a shoelace Gait - We will walk and run in our daily life. Lunge - we will go up and down stairs. Those kind of movement. Twist - we will turn to take some things or we will turn to talk to someone. So the exercise we do should replicate these movements so that we build good strength and, avoid injury. All the images and videos used in this video are taken from muscle&motion, so thanks to them for helping with the content. Now let us get started with the muscle movement. When we do exercise, our muscle undergoes three types of movement. In exercise, we will lift our weight against a resistance in the direction of the muscle fiber. Let’s say that we are doing bicep curl. The muscle fiber runs top to bottom so we will lift our weight up and down. using our biceps. When lifting up, our biceps will produce more energy for the lift our muscle contracts. It is the concentric movement. Isometric hold is the one where we keep the weight holding up and the muscle length does not change. Muscle tension is sustained over a long period of time. It helps us with the stability. We will see why this kind of isometric exercises are must for avoiding injury. When you lower the weight down in a controlled manner, the muscle length lengthens its eccentric motion. This motion is what helps the hypertrophy. Hypertrophy is the word which we use, alternatively, with the muscle growth. we will see how the muscle growth happens when we are doing the controlled eccentric motion like that is, we are slowly releasing the weight down. The muscle undergoes small micro tears. So during workout we are damaging our muscles with those micro tears. Our body is said to be in catabolic state that is we are damaging our body. We heal this damage with the protein in our diet. Our body repairs that muscle in our sleep so that it can, handle such stress in future. So repair in the sense that it will make the muscle grow and make it to adapt to future resistance. That’s how muscle grows. Same applies for bone as well. There will be some micro damages in the bone With our diet and calcium, those damages are repaired resulting in better bone strength helping us being injury free in the long run? That is, the way of our bodies responding to our training. When we do an workout, different muscles in the body takes different roles. First one is agonist. It is the primary mover during a workout. So this muscle helps with the push. So let’s say that we are doing a bicep curl. Biceps are the agonist. So with the biceps, we are doing the lift. Synergiest is the muscle which helps us finishing the movement. So we can see the involvement of synergists in compound movements which we will see in future slides Antagonist are the muscles which are in the opposite direction of the agonist muscle. They resist the movement of the agonist muscle which results in the controlled motion. So when we do a bicep curl our triceps will resist the movement so that we can, move the biceps in a controlled way. Stabilizer muscles are the one which helps us stabilize the body during the movement, and helps us finish the movement without any pain. Let's take an example of shoulder press. We can see in red color that the anterior deltoid and the lateral deltoid are the prime movers. Do not worry about the muscle names. We will see those in detail in the future slides. Just understand that the red muscles are the ones which are moving the weight. The muscles in pink. Triceps. Trapezius. Serratus anterior. So they are the synergists. They are helping the agonist muscles to move the weight. We have core, rotators, and other kinds of muscle as stabilizers to stabilize the shoulder because we are pushing the weight up. We don't want any unwanted movement in the shoulder. We are aiming to move the weight in the upward direction in a controlled manner. Biceps is the antagonist here because it moves in the opposite direction of triceps for controlled movement. While doing exercise, we should be so aware of what muscles are being involved in this exercise and how we should establish proper muscle mind connection, so that we can engage the proper muscle for the controlled movement. There are three ways in which we can do a workout. The first being free weights. So free weights are the ones, like dumbbells and barbells. They are not attached to any machines. We can control the movement like however we want. So free weights are more recommended for compound movements. Resistance machines are the machines which you often see in a gym. So they are targeted especially for some particular set of workouts. They are better for isolated movements. It is good for beginners. And then, when doing in that, we can try to avoid injuries. Bodyweight As the name says, we use our body to do the exercise. So we’ll do push ups, pull ups, squat lunges. You would have heard me mention the word compound movement before. So there are two types of movement. Compound movement and isolated movement Compound Movements are the ones where we involve many muscles in our body to finish the movement, like squats, like deadlifts. We involve most of the muscles in the leg to finish squat movement. Our body’s central nervous system will be activated much more. And we spend so many calories to finish the movement. These compound movements will give our body the signal to secrete more testosterone. That helps in muscle repair and muscle growth. we can increase the weight in compound movements only, so we can let's say for squat we can start with our bodyweight squat. Then we can have a barbell, add five kilos in both. And then we can keep on improving the weight. But same way you can't achieve in isolated movements. Let's say that you were doing bicep curls after adding some weight in the dumbbell. You can't add much more weight. Before diving deep into what exercises are that, let's first see what muscles we have. I have covered only the major kind of muscles , not everything but the major ones which need our attention in the beginning itself in the immediate phase Let's start with chest. The chest can be divided into three parts. I have colored the upper chest in red, the middle chest in yellow, and the lower chest in purple. We target them with the specific workout. Let's go for triceps. The muscle behind your biceps. The name triceps, say that it has three heads From the rear view, we can see the long head and lateral head. We can see the lateral head more from the lateral view (ie) side view. This lateral head is the one which gives that horseshoe looks to the triceps. Underneath these two is the medial head. Then biceps. From the front view we can see the long head and short head. They give the muscle peak look to the biceps. From the lateral view, We can see the small muscle brachialis. Developing this muscle will give the thickness to the arms. So we should aim properly to hit this muscle, during an workout. Now let us look at the shoulder complex. From the front we have anterior deltoid. From the lateral side, we have the lateral deltoid. From the rear, we have posterior deltoid, which we will say as rear delts. Though trapezius come as a part of back muscles. I have included the upper trapezius here. So with all these four muscles it will give a good develop shoulder look like 3D look. Sometimes I use the word traps, instead of trapezius. Both mean the same thing. Let us look at back muscles. It's one of the huge muscles in our body. We have traps. Look at the traps. We have upper, middle and lower traps. Each muscle fibers running in different directions. So we have to hit them differently to achieve growth in those areas. We have the lats below. This is the muscle which use the v-tapered look to the body. It also should be trained in different direction for better growth. Above that we have rhomboids. So below all these muscles, we have deep back muscles. So they are responsible for stability of the shoulder. Most of the shoulder pain will come due to one of the muscles being weak or not activated properly or not trained properly. I would recommend you to check out the Squat University channel for better understanding. Dr. Aaron is the best physical therapist who works with the elite athletes like Indian weightlifter Mirabai Chanu. It is a legit channel. It is the best channel to see to avoid any kind of injuries during a lift. So let's proceed for forearms. Forearms have many muscles to do many operations like, palm up and down. Flexion and extension. I have covered only the major muscle Brachioradialis. Next, we have, two major muscles in the neck, which are, responsible for posture and stability. They are Levator Scapula and SCM when we hunched down to see the laptops, these muscles get involved. We have to stretch this properly. And strengthen other neck muscles for better posture. So now that the upper body is done, let's look at the legs. We start with the upper portion. From the front we have quadriceps which basically has four muscles. That is why the name quadriceps we will call it as quads. To the rear, we have a hamstrings. Both hamstrings, we have glutes. In this, we have gluteus Maximus and gluteus medius. Weak gluteus medius can cause stability issues, so it should be activated properly. This muscle is responsible for our internal and external movement of thigh. So let's look at lower legs. We have calves Calves is essentially two muscle groups. The outer one is gastrocnemius and the inner one is soleus. The inner thighs are called the adductor muscles. Helps in the horizontal motion. So it pulls our body towards the midline of the body. Hence the name adductor. So now let us see the favorite muscles The Abs. we have two oblique muscles on the sides. External oblique: The muscle fibers run top down. Beneath that we have internal oblique where the muscle fibers run upward. In the center we have a rectus abdominis, the six pack muscle. But the real deal is the muscles underneath those abs muscles. They are core muscles. We have the transverse abdominis where the muscle fibers run in the horizontal direction. And we have Erector Spinae group of muscles running along the spinal cord. We have diaphragm at the top and pelvic floor at the bottom. So these four muscles form like a closed can structure 🥫 So these are the internal muscles in our body. Continuing to those four muscles we have Quadratus Lumborum Multifidus and rotators. These are all important. I will tell you why. You see, this is the neutral spine. As you can see, it is not a straight line. It's curved. When you see what separates the upper body from the lower body, is just the spine in between. We have no other bones. So when you bend down to do squats, or when you bend down to take some weight, you shouldn't put much resistance on the spine because you will get lower back pain. So that is where the core muscles get involved. When you do such kind of activities, you have to activate those core muscles properly so that those core muscles will help the spine maintain the neutral position so that you can finish the movement properly and pain free. So movement mechanics. So this section has two slides of self learn topics. The first one is fundamental movement terminology. there are different terms which we will use to define a movement. For example when you lift the forearm for bicep curl, we call it flexion. When you rotate the palm down, we call it pronation. So these kind of body movements are defined here. The next one is a plane of motion. They define the plane in which the movement occurs. For example, when we when we do bicep curl we move the arms up and down. But when doing jumping jacks, we move the arms sideways. Now let's proceed for exercise library. I have just shared the list of major exercises to stick to. They cover all the muscle groups. So let's, check those list of exercises. But before that, Let's have some four points in our mind. Whenever we are doing an exercise, we need to make sure that we are doing a proper form so that, we do not get injury. When doing that exercise, we should feel the muscle, which helps us finishing the movement. While doing a movement, we should do it in a full range of motion. Meaning that when I do bicep curl, I should lengthen my bicep till the below, and then I should lift the weight till the top. I shouldn’t stop in between, or move the body in a way that I finish with half reps While doing each repetition of the exercise. We should control our breathing. So for example, doing bicep curl before lifting the weight, we should inhale and maintain the abdominal pressure inside the core, then lift the weight up. Exhale during eccentric phase. Let's start with the core exercises because it is the most important one. Before doing any workout on any day, start with the core workout first. I recommend doing McGill big 3, planks and shoulder taps. Make sure that we are engaging our core muscles properly in all the compound exercises. I have shared the workout references in the video description. Please check those out. These are the list of exercises covering different areas of chest. Now let's see. Only bench press. During bench press, we have a pectoralis major, as agonist muscle that’s the prime mover. The synergist muscles are Triceps, anterior deltoid and serratus anterior. So you can see how all these muscles help in finishing the movement. For back, we keep in mind that all the vertical movements like pull lat down, they all add width to your back while the horizontal movement like rows, they add thickness to your muscles. These are all the list of exercises covering different areas of back at different angle. Now let us see only the lat pulldown. You can think of lat pulldown, as two parts exercise. First is scapular retraction and depression, where you pull the scapula back and down to stabilize the shoulder. The second one is pulling the weight down. Here the lats is the agonist muscle. We have traps, rear delt, biceps & other small muscles, as synergists. Generally, in back exercises we involve forearms and biceps a lot. So those muscles will be engaged In lat pull down, we will use core muscles as stabilizer. Now let’s see Rear Delt High Row. It is one of the exercises which doesn't involve lats. It targets our rear delt, along with rhomboids and middle traps. These are all the list of exercises covering our shoulders. Now let's see only the Lateral raise. So here you can see that we are involving our lateral delts. So the side delt as the prime mover. For biceps it's enough to do only two exercises a main thing. First one being incline dumbbell curl and cross body hammer curl. In the incline dumbbell, we are trying to hit the long head and short head of the biceps using cross body. How many curl you're hitting the brachialis. So these two should be good because we are hitting the biceps during our back workout. For triceps, you have to workout differently. We will stretch the long head and lateral head in a workout, followed by another workout to contract those. We will see those in the upcoming slide. We use reverse grip cable push down to target the medium height. You see the first two exercises of triceps. The first one is lengthening the long and lateral head, while the second one is creating a contraction of the triceps, which the first one can't achieve. The last one is a reverse grip push down for the medial head For forearm, You can try all these exercises. We need to workout our forearm to improve our grip strength because having good grip will lead to better lifting. Now we will see the leg excessive. Most of the leg excesses consume more energy, as the last leg muscles are bigger compared to the upper body muscles. Doing them in a proper form is a must to avoid injury. For that, we have to engage our core properly. Let's see only the squats now. For squats you can see like full leg, all the muscles in legs are getting involved. The prime movers being quads and glutes. You can keep your feet a bit flared out as per your convenience and whatever feel natural to you. Move your knee over your feet while coming down. Your knee should go over the feet. That way you will be able to feel your quads. Make sure that you are keeping your core engaged. Back muscles squeezed for the better upper body control. Try to come down as much as possible and try to do reps. Next we will see Romanian deadlift. This is mainly to concentrate on hamstrings and glutes. The difference between the squat and the Romanian deadlift is that we won't move the knee past our feet. We will just move our glutes backward so that we can stretch the hamstrings as much as we can. Now abs. for Six-Pack, you do not need plenty of excess. Just two variations. First one being a crunch kind of variation. The second one being leg raise. That's all. No more exercises, because we are already activating our core too much in our compound movements. Now let's see stretches. Why they're important and why we should do it before and after our workouts. Dynamic stretches. So they are the ones we have to do before the workout. The reason we are doing it is because of we have to warm up the blood around the muscle, which we are going to do the workout for. Think of our muscle like a rubber band. If the rubber band is cold and we pull it, it will snap. So we have to warm the rubber band first for the proper pulling movement. Same way we have to work the muscle first before putting any stress. So based on the workout of our day, we have to properly choose the dynamic stretch. If it is a leg day, we have to do leg specific dynamic stretches. I would recommend to do dynamic stretches for neck always. Next, we have static stretches, where we keep the muscle elongated in a position for more than 15 to 30s. It will relax our muscle. We must do it for the muscle for which we have worked out for the day. Let us say that we have done chest. So we need to do static stretches for the chest. Let's say that we have done legs. We have to do static stretches for the legs. Okay, so since we are doing work in front of the computer, our shoulders are always, always hunching towards a laptop leading to weak rotator cuff muscles. It should be properly activated before the upper body workout. So for these three make sure that we are doing those before the upper body workouts, to have a pain free or injury free workouts, because any kind of upper body workout we are involving our shoulders. We are also sitting in front of the computer for the long time, so it will cause our hip flexor muscles to be overactive. Because we are always keeping these muscles contracted. So these are the deep muscles of the hip. We have to do hip flexor muscles stretches every day to compensate for that contraction. So here is a self learn section again. Learn what is muscle imbalance Why that occurs? What are the overactive and underactive muscles and why we should Strengthen the underactive muscle and stretch the overactive muscle. Workout structure. So let’s discuss how we should workout during a single gym session. Let’s say that our aim is to do leg workout, in what order we should do. We should always start with dynamic warmup. Get the blood moving. Do some dynamic stretches. Do some light cardio. Make sure that we are not exhausting our energy. Then we will do core activation and any kind of stabilization work. Followed by that, we will finish up the leg workout or any kind of the muscle that we have targeted for that day. Aim for the compound lift first as they consume so much of energy. Then do cardio of any kind. We can do it based on our goal. Then we can finish off with the static stretching, for better recovery. Okay, now we know that we have to lift weights, but how do we know how much to do? So we quantify those with the sets reps and the rest time. Reps are number of times you lift the weight continuously within a set, you don’t put the weight down and continue to lift the weights. Sets are number of groups (number of times) you are repeating the set of reps. So for example, I have done a bicep curl for 12 repetitions. I will keep the weight down and then I'll pick it up. Do another 12 reps. Now that makes two sets. Rest time is the duration we pass between sets to recover. Okay, so there are different sets, reps and rest range. But how do we know which one we have to follow. So these are the possible ranges for different goals. For endurance you have to follow a different way. For hypertrophy you have to follow a different way. For strength building, You have to follow a different way. For beginners, I would recommend to stick to hypertrophy range where we do 2 to 3 sets of a single exercise. We repeat for 8 to 12 reps. The 12 reps in the sense that the 12th rep we are doing, we should be pushing our max to finish that rep. And then we rest 60 to 90s in between. Okay, so now we have done some sort of exercise and then we are done. We have done the same for a month. We will get used to that weight. So 12 reps would have been much easier. So how do we progress from here? We can do it in two ways. Either we can increase the weight so that we will be able to do just 12 reps, or try to go for 15 reps and then increase the weight and then go for 12 reps. So we can do either way. For hypertrophy, go with more weights and then aim for the 12 reps. Okay, so now we know what order of workout we have to do in a day. But how do we, structure our workout within a week? As a beginner, we can aim for one muscle group per day. So in that day, we can aim for only 2 to 3 exercises with the light weights. That’s all. Our aim is to perfect the form. So the schedule might be like we can do just on Monday, back on Tuesday, leg on Wednesday. Take a rest. shoulder on Friday and arms on Saturday and then take a rest. It's okay if you can't do any workout in a week you can just skip a day and then continue from there. It is okay. No worries. Remember that we are in this for a long term. We don't see quick results. As a beginner. We have to make sure that we are doing all the exercise with the proper form. So once all the exercises are getting comfortable and then, we are good with working heavier weights. We can go for intermediate range where we can, aim to workout only four days a week. So in that four days a week, we can workout like push, pull, leg and missed parts. We can do a push on one day, pull on one day leg on one day and other parts on the remaining day. Push always involves exercise exercises involving chest, shoulder and triceps. For pull, it will involve back and biceps. So it is another four day kind of split. We can do upper and lower in the first two days, take a rest and then repeat again. Take two, two more days of rest. We can include abs and cardio as we see fit. Let’s say that we are so busy in a week and then we want to. We can work on only three days a week. At that time, we can follow these splits. We can, work like legs on one day, push on one day, pull on another day. Or we can work out like full body workout on one day. Take a rest. Upper body on another day, take rest lower body on another day. Let’s say that we are so busy. We can workout only two times a week. We can go with full body workout on each day. Select exercise in a way that you are covering all the body parts, and then make sure that you are giving importance to compound movements first. This is another self learn section. So there are different ways in which we can organize a workout in a session. Like we can choose to do different kinds of workout back to back in a row. Or we can choose to involve opposite muscles together in a set. Like we can choose to workout back immediately, followed by doing a workout for chest you can explore and then see how each one is different and what advantage each gives. EGO !!! So when we do workout in in the gym, we should not have ego. There will always be times there will be people who are younger than me, who are elder than me, who will be doing better lifts with better weight. So we should not get intimidated by those. Our aim is to get fit in the longer term. We should be improving and progressing on ourself. Don't compare. Don't do ego lifting. So those things will lead to injuries. I have seen many people getting disc bulge because of doing, heavy weight in the squats or deadlift. So be careful. So these are the YouTube channels you can follow To know more about exercises. Okay, so now let's go with cardio. Let's start with the energy systems. When we do an activity based on the duration and intensity of that activity, the energy source will vary. Let's say that I'm sprinting fast. My body won't make use of fat as energy source because as you can see, it will make use of different sources like ATP, creatine phosphate and glycogen as energy source. They will get depleted within 2 to 3 minutes. So that's the reason why we can't sprint more than 2 to 3 minutes. So these systems they don't involve they don't require oxygen to produce energy. So hence the name anaerobic system. Aerobic system is the one where we use where our body uses oxygen to produce energy. So those activities will be like long distance jogging or brisk walking. So in those kind of activities, our body will make use of the fat in our body as energy source. These are all different cardio training zones. Here Max HR means maximum heart rate. Consider the 50 to 60% max heart rate zone. So here the activity will be like a brisk walk. Here our body will make use of only the fat as energy source. That is why when you walk 10,000 steps a day, our weight will come down. It's because we are walking 10,000 steps in a day for so many days. Our body makes use of fat as any source. So our body's weight naturally comes down. In 60 to 80% of max HR range, our body makes use of both fat and glycogen for energy use. Compared to the, previous zone, Here, our body will spend more calories in a lesser amount of time. This zone is generally called a zone two cardio. In the last zone, we perform at our max capacity. It is the anaerobic zone. We don't need oxygen to do these intense activities. It is good for our heart health. It will improve our VO2 max. VO2 max is the maximum oxygen our body can use during an intense exercise HIIT and 4x4 are the different type of activities which will improve our VO2 max. The abbreviation of HIIT is high intensity interval training. It means that we perform a high intensity activity for some time and then rest for some time. For example, we can choose to do 30 seconds of intensity activity like Battle ropes, burpees, jumping jacks, and then rest for another 30s and repeat the same for 10 to 15 minutes. Another protocol is 4x4. It is similar to HIIT, but we will do high intensity activity for four minutes. Rest for three minutes. Repeat the same for four minutes. Do not do this in the beginning itself. Get better with HIIT and then improve for 4x4. So this is one of the famous question everyone has can we lose fat at a particular spot? Quick Answer: NO We cannot decide how our body should lose fat. Our body decides itself where to take the fat from. The only thing which we can control is that we can be in a caloric deficit. That is, we eat less than we spend our energy. So just be consistent with the diet and workout. So in the long term, results will come. So don't worry. As usual we have implementation path. We have discussed so many points. We have discussed so many exercises. So do not worry about everything. This is the implementation path. You finish off one by one and then proceed to another with confidence. Don't be in an urgency. Start with dynamic stretches. Core and rotator cuff isometric exercises. Do 1 or 2 basic workouts. Develop better mind-muscle connection. Do with it. Do it with the proper form. Then go for cardio. Just keep on improving. There is no urgency to learn everything now. There is no urgency to get everything done now. Just keep on improving. If you like the video, please share it with your friends and family, who might find this useful. To support DadFit, you can grab me a cup of coffee using the link in the description. For personal training, checkout dadfit.in Thank you for your time. Bye.

Hi. Welcome to the last video in the series. So here we will discuss about different situations which we will face in the life which could affect our fitness path. how to think about those situations and approach those? Let's get started. India & Protein: Indian diet is not rich in protein. It's so full of carbs and fats. Indian people are resistant to change in terms of their diet. We have to teach them. We have to teach our family about importance of protein, fiber. We have to get our family aligned with the protein. So sit with them. Talk with them. Get them on the same page. How do we handle when we are traveling? We need to prioritize protein and fiber. We should be walking wherever we can. Because when we are traveling, we obviously don't have our cars or whatever. So we can prefer to walk. We can do bodyweight exercises like pushups, pullups, squats, burpees, jumping jacks in the hotel rooms. We can use a resistance band, to do some small resistance training. We can avoid junk food. We need to make sure that we're enjoying the local cuisine, without overeating. If possible, we can carry protein bars, snacks, seeds. They will come in handy. So how do we reframe the relationship with the food? When we think of food restriction, we tend to rebel and have more cravings. That is because you will think that we can't have that food for our lifetime. In our current economy, we can get any food anytime we want, at any price range. So it is not about the food availability. If we are going to have food, which we are not even going to get it in our lifetime, we can have that food in moderation. But it is generally not the case now. Like we have discussed in the diet chapter, it is always between two variables, Joy of eating [vs] Guilt of eating. Think on those. And based on that, we can take better decision. Family function: the one which we can never avoid. So these could be like marriages. These could be like receptions, birthday parties. We need to think in a way that we consume protein and fiber before going to the function. And then we can have our carbs, from sweets or rice in moderation. We should be mindful in eating. How do we handle illness? There will be a time where we will get some acute diseases, like fever, cold, At that time, we should not worry about our diet. We should focus on our recovery. We should have light foods, soups and broth for the same. We should be well hydrated. There will be times we will have to skip a workout, maybe because of family emergency, or sudden change of plan or anything. Let’s not worry. Our gains won't vanish right away. We should be careful of what we eat in that day. And then how do we keep our body moving? After everything is sorted out, we can get back on the track. Consistency matters. If you think that you are going to workout 3 to 4 times in a day, it is planned to be like 150 to 200 workouts in a year. Skipping 1 or 2 workouts won't make a dent. Just relax and then we can continue with our work. We know we have discussed about N.E.A.T (non-exercise activity thermogenesis). We can be active with our kids by taking them to the park or grocery store to spend some extra calories. Our kids are already physically active. We can just join them and spend more calories. Continuing N.E.A.T. We have seen many people achieving targets of 10000 steps per day. I have tried that, but it is a huge amount of time I have to do nothing. The only thing which I can do is listen to some songs or audio podcast. I was not a fan of walking and listening. If I want to think, I will take a walk. Otherwise, in general, I can cover 7000 to 8000 steps a day. Even if it is not possible, it's okay. I can, I can take 7000 to 8000 steps the next day. So we can adjust the target to be in the 7000 range, and then walk wherever we can. When we go to gym, we will see many people who are doing workouts in a different way. don't judge those. Just observe. Make a note of it. Do a research later and then think if it contradicts with our existing knowledge. Based on our research, we can take a stand and adjust our knowledge. Be open to new ideas and always learn. Stress is a silent killer, so it will affect our mood. It will lead to fat gain, poor recovery, poor sleep. It comes from not working on some things which we can control we should not worry about the things which we cannot control. We should be more conscious of our thoughts and actions. Once we have taken the action and made a step further, there is no need to worry. We have seen so many concepts in diet and exercise, video. Don't get overwhelmed. Do one thing at a time as per the implementation guideline. Master it. Go for the next one. Take your sweet time. Take liberty to do your own research. After achieving a step, celebrate small wins. This way you can, compound on your results. Sleep is the most important one. It's a time when our body recovers. We should aim to sleep at a consistent sleep schedule. We should avoid mobile screens before bed. We should avoid to have dinner 2 to 3 hours before sleep, because it will affect our digestion and sleep as well. If you like the video, please share it with your friends and family members who might find this useful. If you want to support DadFit, you can grab me a cup of coffee using the link in the description For person training, checkout dadfit.in Thank you for your time. Bye.

